[doc][yba] High Availability improvements (#20752)
yugabyte/yugabyte-db: docs/content/preview/yugabyte-platform/administer-yugabyte-platform/high-availability.md

type: docs
---

YugabyteDB Anywhere (YBA) high availability (HA) is an active-standby model for multiple YBA instances. YBA HA uses YugabyteDB's distributed architecture to replicate your YBA data across multiple virtual machines (VM), ensuring that you can recover quickly from a VM failure and continue to manage and monitor your universes, with your configuration and metrics data intact.

Each HA cluster includes a single active YBA instance and at least one standby YBA instance, configured as follows:

- The active instance runs normally, but also pushes out backups of its state to all of the standby instances in the HA cluster.

> - A standby instance is completely passive while in standby mode and cannot be used for managing or monitoring clusters until you manually promote it to active.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A standby instance is completely passive while in standby mode, and cannot be used for managing or monitoring clusters until you manually promote it to active.
```

Backups from the active instance are periodically taken and pushed to standby instances at a configurable frequency (no more than once per minute). The active instance also creates and sends one-off backups to standby instances whenever a task completes (such as creating a new universe). Metrics are duplicated to standby instances using Prometheus federation. Standby instances retain the ten most recent backups on disk.

When you promote a standby instance to active, YBA restores your selected backup, and then automatically demotes the previous active instance to standby mode.

## Prerequisites

Before configuring a HA cluster for your YBA instances, ensure that you have the following:

- [Multiple YBA instances](../../install-yugabyte-platform/) to be used in the HA cluster.

> - The YBA instances can connect to each other over the port where the YugabyteDB Anywhere UI is reachable (typically 443).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The YBA instances can connect to each other over the port where the YBA UI is reachable (typically 443).
```

- Communication is open in both directions over ports 9000 and 9090 on all YBA instances.
- If you are using custom ports for Prometheus, all YBA instances are using the same custom port. The default Prometheus port for YugabyteDB Anywhere is 9090.

> - All YBA instances are running the same version of YBA software. You should upgrade all YBA instances in the HA cluster at approximately the same time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

- All YBA instances are running the same version of YBA software. So, you should upgrade all YBA instances in the HA cluster at approximately the same time.
```

Your standby instance is now configured.

### Verify HA

To confirm communication between the active and standby, you can do the following:

> - Click **Make Active** on the standby (but don't promote it). You should see a list of available backups that you can restore from.

Reviewer 2: Can we add the relevant image in the internal doc to clarify what we are talking about

> - Click **Make Active** on the standby. You should see a list of available backups that you can restore from. (Don't promote the standby.)

Reviewer: (Don't promote the standby.)- does it mean don't do it yet before next step.. I thought clicking make active would promote the standby. can you clarify?

- Verify that Prometheus on the standby is able to see similar metrics to the active. Navigate to `http://<STANDBY_IP>:9090/targets`; the federate target should have a status of UP, and the endpoint should match the active instance IP address.

    ![Verify Prometheus](/images/yp/high-availability/ha-prometheus.png)

> - Navigate to **Profile > Releases** and verify that the standby has all the database releases that are in use by universes, and that the releases are listed as Active. To discover all the database releases that are in use by universes, you can view the **Dashboard** page.

Reviewer 2: This could benefit from the images in the internal doc

    If releases are missing, follow the instructions in [How to configure YugabyteDB Anywhere to provide Older, Hotfix, or Debug Builds](https://support.yugabyte.com/hc/en-us/articles/360054421952-How-to-configure-YugabyteDB-Anywhere-to-provide-Older-Hotfix-or-Debug-Builds).

> If the YBA instances are configured to use the HTTPS protocol and you are having problems, verify that certificates and ports are set up correctly. If the issue persists, consider relaxing the certificate validation requirements as a workaround, by enabling the [runtime configuration](../manage-runtime-config/) `yb.ha.ws.ssl.loose.acceptAnyCertificate` (set the flag to `true`).

Reviewer 2: Can we add this near line 103 where we talk about the cert setup? It makes more sense as a fallback there.

Author: This strikes me more as a troubleshooting step you take after setup and communication is not working (after veryfying HA setup). I think it would worke better in a short Troubleshooting subsection; are there any other tips for troubleshooting your HA setup if it isn't working

> 

Reviewer 2: Can we add this section, which we added to the internal doc recently

Load balancer setup

To set up a single URL that points to the current primary even after a switchover/failover, it is recommended to set up an Application Load Balancer with the health check URL for each instance set to https://<instance IP/DNS>/ha_leader. Note that you may need to include the Load Balancer URL to the “Support Origin URL” as documented in this [support KB](https://support.yugabyte.com/hc/en-us/articles/360060669972-Error-Invalid-CORS-request-in-logs-when-logging-into-Yugabyte-Platform-Yugaware-UI).

## Promote a standby instance to active

You can make a standby instance active as follows:

1. On the standby instance you want to promote, navigate to **Admin > High Availability > Replication Configuration** and click **Make Active**.

1. Select the backup from which you want to restore (in most cases, you should choose the most recent backup) and enable **Confirm promotion**.

1. Click **Continue**. The restore takes a few seconds, after which expect to be signed out.

1. Sign in using the credentials that you had configured on the previously active instance.

You should be able to see that all of the data has been restored into the instance, including universes, users, metrics, alerts, task history, cloud providers, and so on.

### Verify promotion

> After switching or failing over to the standby, verify that the old active YBA instance is in standby mode (switchover) or no longer available (failover). If both YBA instances were to attempt to perform actions on a universe, it could have unpredictable side effects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After switching or failing over to the standby, verify that the old active YBA instance is in standby mode (switchover), or no longer available (failover). If both YBA instances were to attempt to perform actions on a universe, it could have unpredictable side effects.
```

#### Switchover

After a switchover, do the following:

- [Verify that HA is functioning properly](#verify-ha).

> - If the old active instance is not in standby mode, there could be an issue with communication from the new active to the old active instance. Follow the [setup instructions](#configure-active-and-standby-instances) to verify that certificates and ports are set up correctly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If the old active instance is not in standby mode, there could be a communication issue from the new active to the old active instance. Follow the [setup instructions](#configure-active-and-standby-instances) to verify that certificates and ports are set up correctly.
```

    If you can't identify the timestamp for whatever reason, you can provide a current timestamp to forcibly demote the instance. However, it will be harder to reestablish the HA connection as the active and standby will have different notions of the last failover time. This could lead to unexpected behavior.

    If there are any issues with the old active going into standby that you can't resolve, you should disable HA completely and re-enable it with the new active-standby configuration.

- If the old active instance has successfully switched to standby, [verify that HA is functioning properly](#verify-ha).

## Upgrade instances

All instances involved in HA should use the same version of YugabyteDB Anywhere. Promoting a standby instance using a YBA backup from an active instance where the YBA versions are different may result in errors.

Although you can upgrade all YBA instances simultaneously and there are no explicit ordering requirements regarding upgrades of active and standby instances, you should follow these general guidelines:

- Start an upgrade with the active instance.

> - After the active instance has been upgraded, ensure that YugabyteDB Anywhere is reachable by signing in and checking various pages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- After the active instance has been upgraded, ensure that YBA is reachable by signing in and checking various pages.
```

- Proceed with upgrading standby instances.
- After upgrading all instances, verify that the standbys are receiving new backups from the active instance.

Certificates in the trust store should not require setup again.

> {{< warning title="Don't promote an old active backup" >}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< warning title="Important: Don't promote an old active backup" >}}
```
